SPEAKER: Expression
changed after it
has been checked error.
You'll encounter this error
if your code changes a value
after change
detection has been run
and the view has
been built. You'll
only see this error
in development
because Angular runs an
additional change detection
check to catch
errors like this that
can cause erratic UI behavior.
The extra check ensures
the app is stable
and that all data updates have
been reflected in the views.
There are a variety
of reasons that view
might be left in an inconsistent
state, such as code that
updates the view during the
AfterViewInit lifecycle hook
or when change detection
triggers itself
in an infinite loop,
like a method that
returns a different
value each time
or a child component
that changes
the bindings on its parent.
Let's start by looking
at a simple reproduction
and solution.
Then we'll take a more detailed
look at Angular's change
detection to understand
why this error happens
and why it's important.
Here in the app
component template,
we're using the ngIf directive
with a loading Boolean.
In the model or our
component type script,
we give it a default
value of true.
Then using the AfterViewInit
lifecycle hook,
we flip the value to false
when it's done loading.
But when we run
this code, we see
expression changed after
it has been checked error.
Previous value false,
current value true.
Now, in a more complex
app, it might not
be clear where this
error originates from.
But you can always
assume that it
has something to do with
a binding in the template.
In the stack trace, you'll
find a link to the source map
for the component template
that caused the error.
And it takes us directly
to the line of code
that caused the issue, which is
our ngIf binding to the loading
Boolean.
What the error is trying to
tell us is that the loading
value has changed after
the change detection cycle
has completed.
But what exactly is wrong
with our code in this case?
The short answer is that we're
using the wrong lifecycle hook.
If we move our code from
AfterViewInit to OnInit,
the error goes away and
everything works perfectly.
In other words, if you find
yourself updating values
in AfterViewInit,
there's a good chance
that a simple refactor to OnInit
or the component constructor
will fix the issue.
OK, at this point, we know we
used the wrong lifecycle hook
and we can fix it
by refactoring.
But to really
understand why, let's
do a quick review of how change
detection works in Angular.
The goal of change
detection is to keep
the model, your type
script code, in sync
with the template, your HTML.
And it does so by looking for
data changes in the component
tree from top to bottom.
First it checks the parent, then
the first child, second child,
and so on.
But if we update a
binding on the parent
after it has already
been checked,
Angular will throw the error.
Now, what we have here
is a simplified breakdown
of Angular's
lifecycle or the steps
it performs when a component
is first initialized.
First it updates the bindings
like the ngIf directive
and the template.
Then it runs the OnInit
lifecycle hook, updates
the dom, then runs change
detection for the child
component.
Notice how the final
step is AfterViewInit,
and more importantly, that it
runs after change detection.
Basically, any
code that runs here
should not attempt
to update the view.
And that was the root of
the problem in this case.
Refactoring to OnInit works
great for initial values.
But if that doesn't
fix the issue,
there are a few
other ways you may
have encountered this error
along with additional ways
to fix it.
In the component here, we're
using ViewChild to grab
an element from the dom.
But this element
won't be available
until the AfterViewInit
lifecycle hook is called.
But what if we can't update
the state of the component
until after we have
the ViewChild element?
If we can't refactor
to ngOnInit,
we have a couple
of other options.
An approach you'll often see
on Stack Overflow answers
is to make the
update asynchronous.
When we make the
update async, it'll
be picked up on the next
change detection check
and prevent the
error from occurring.
We can make it asynchronous
by wrapping it in a set
timeout with a delay of 0.
That'll put the update in
the next macro task queue
of the JavaScript event loop.
Alternatively, we
can use a promise
that resolves immediately then
run the update in its callback.
This code will achieve
the same result.
The only subtle difference is
that it runs on the microtask
queue before the end of
the current iteration
in the browser's event loop.
Making the update
asynchronous can work,
however it's very
implicit and should really
only be used as a last resort.
It's not clear why we make this
code asynchronous unless you
understand the nuances of
Angular change detection
and the browser's event loop.
Luckily, Angular provides us
with a more direct and explicit
way to trigger change detection.
We can manually trigger it by
injecting the change detector
ref in the constructor
of the component.
We can then use it to manually
run change detection by calling
the detectChanges method.
This will tell Angular to
check the view and its children
in which case, it will notice
that our loading state has
changed, giving us yet another
way to address the error.
Now, an entirely different way
you might encounter this error
is when you have
a method, usually
a getter, that doesn't
return a predictable value,
which can cause an infinite
change detection loop.
Take for example this
getter in our component that
returns a random number.
If we try to use this
value in the template,
Angular will get a different
value each time it's checked.
The solution in
this case is to make
the method return a
consistent value based
on the state of the component.
In other words, getters
should be derived directly
from the component state
and not values that change
constantly like timestamps
or random numbers.
Now let's take a
look at one more
example where we have both
a parent and child component
at play.
The app component, the parent,
contains the loading state,
just like our previous examples.
But instead of running
the update from the parent
component, we'll make it
happen from a child component
with a custom event.
In the item
component, the child,
we're using the output decorator
to create a custom event along
with an event emitter.
Then during ngOnInit, we'll
go ahead and emit the event
with a value of true.
Then back in the app
component template,
we'll go ahead and declare
the item component.
When it fires, we'll set
the loading value to false.
The end result is
a situation where
we have a child component
updating the parent
after change detection has
already run on the parent.
And once again, that
produces the error.
A potential solution
in this case
would be to move the loading
state into the child component.
And if that's not
possible, you might
consider moving the
state to a shared service
where it can be ejected
in multiple components.
Let's finish up by
doing a quick recap.
The expression
changed after it has
been checked error occurs
because a value in the template
has been updated after change
detection has finished.
Debug it by first finding the
template in the stack trace.
From there you can
analyze your code
to determine where the
value is being updated
and use one of the methods
covered in this video
to address it, such as
refactoring to the OnInit
lifecycle hook, using
ChangeDetectorRef
manually, making
getters idempotent,
or making your updates
async as a last resort.
Refer to the Angular
documentation
for additional
details and examples.